1.Which of the listed terms is described by: “All the chemical processes that take place in the organelles and cytoplasm the cells of the body”?
A)  Metabolism
B)  Cellular respiration
C)  Homeostasis
D)  Physiology
ANS: A
Explanation: The quoted statement is a definition of metabolism

2.Which major organ lies deep to the right hypochondriac region?
A) The stomach
B) The spleen
C) The liver
D) The duodenum
ANS: C
Explanation: hypochondriac = below the rib cartilage; liver is located mostly on the right side.

3.Which plane of the body divides it into dorsal and ventral regions?
A) Transverse
B) Axial
C) Coronal
D) Sagittal
ANS: C
Explanation: dorsal and ventral = front and back – a coronal section so divides the body into these sections.

4.To which of the following does the “tissue level” of structural organisation refer?
A) atoms, ions, molecules and electrolytes
B) mitochondria, ribosomes, nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum
C) nephron, alveolus, villus, lobule
D) muscle, nervous, connective, epithelial
ANS: D
Explanation: the listed structures are the four major tissue types.

5.The directional term “superior” in anatomy means which of the following?
A) cephalic
B) ventral
C) caudal
D) dorsal
ANS: A
Explanation: cephalic refers to the head region. While superior refers to being closer to the head than is the other anatomical structure in question.

6.Which of the following is the best definition of physiology?
A) The microscopic study of tissues and cells
B) The study of how the body works.
C) All the chemical processes that take place in the organelles of the body’s cells.
D) The body’s automatic tendency to maintain a relatively constant internal environment.
ANS: B
Explanation: physiology is indeed the study of how the (healthy) body functions.

7.The “anatomical position” could be described as which of the following?
A) Lying down prone
B) Lying down supine
C) Standing displaying the ventral surface of the body
D) Standing with arms and legs abducted
ANS: C
Explanation: this is the best answer. Standing is required, as is having the arms hanging parallel to the sides, with palms facing forward.

8.Which choice best describes the location of the majority of the musculo-skeletal system?
A) It is in the dorsal cavity
B) It is in the ventral cavity
C) It is in the abdomino-pelvic cavity
D) It is not located in a body cavity
ANS: D
Explanation: the musculo-skeletal system is located in the arms and legs, and surrounding, but outside of the abdomino-pelvic, thoracic and the dorsal cavities.

9.Which of the following is/are the contents of the ventral cavity?
A) heart and lungs
B) brain and spinal cord
C) viscera
D) gut, kidneys, liver, pancreas, spleen, bladder, internal reproductive organs.
ANS: C
Explanation: this is the best answer. It is a collective term for all organs in the thoracic and abdomino-pelvic cavities.

10.Which of the stated relationships is correct?
A) the heart is inferior to the clavicle
B) the shoulder is distal to the carpals
C) the phalanges are proximal to the metacarpals
D) the eye is medial to the eyebrows
ANS: A
Explanation: The heart is indeed below (inferior) to the clavicle. All other choices are wrong.

11.Which of the following is/are the contents of the dorsal body cavity?
A) heart and lungs
B) brain and spinal cord
C) viscera
D) gut, kidneys, liver, pancreas, spleen, bladder, internal reproductive organs.
ANS: B
Explanation: dorsal refers to the back, the cavity enclosed by the skull and vertebrae.

12.Which of the stated relationships is correct?
A) the heart is superior to the large intestine
B) the shoulder is distal to the metacarpals
C) the phalanges are proximal to the carpals
D) the eye is medial to the nose
ANS: A
Explanation: the heart is indeed above (superior) to the intestine. All other answers are wrong.

13.What is the study of how body parts function called?
A) histology
B) physiology
C) homeostasis
D) metabolism
ANS: B
Explanation: physiology refers to function

14.Which of the following correctly describes the two named body parts
A) the elbow is proximal to the shoulder
B) the phalanges are distal to the carpals
C) the ribs are proximal to the sternum
D) the elbow is distal to the knee
ANS: B
Explanation: phalanges (finger bones) are indeed further from the trunk along the arm, than are the carpals (wrist bones)

15.Which one of the following statements is correct
A) the diaphragm separates the brain and spinal cord
B) the ventral cavity contains the male and female reproductive system
C) the abdomino-pelvic cavity contains the spinal cord.
D) the dorsal cavity contains the brain and spinal cord
ANS: D
Explanation: dorsal means back and that is the cavity with spinal cord and brain. B is incorrect as the genitalia are outside the ventral cavity.

16.Complete the sentence correctly: “Cervical vertebrae are…
A) superior to the rib cage.
B) inferior to the thoracic vertebrae.
C) located between the thoracic and sacral vertebrae.
D) fused into a single bone called the sacrum.
ANS: A
Explanation: cervix refers to “neck”. The cervical vertebrae are in the neck hence are above (superior) to the rib cage.

17.The dorsal body cavity contains which of the following organs
A) The brain.
B) The brain and spinal cord.
C) The brain, spinal cord and heart.
D) The brain, spinal cord, heart and kidneys.
ANS: B
Explanation: Dorsal refers to the back and is opposite to ventral. Only the brain and spinal cord occupy the dorsal cavity. All other answers are incorrect.

18.What does the process known as anabolism refer to?
A) the use of energy for producing chemical substances.
B) the breaking down phase of metabolism.
C) all the chemical process that take place in the organelles of the cells.
D) the supply of nutrients to the body’s cells.
ANS: A
Explanation: anabolism refers to the process of constructing/building mole- cules (think anabolic steroids). B refers to catabolism. C refers to metabolism.

19.To what does the term “hypochondriac” refer?
A) A condition of having too few chondria.
B) The region of abdomen inferior to the ribs.
C) A person who often complains of an ailment.
D) Having insufficient cartilage in the knees.
ANS: B
Explanation: In this case “hypo-” means below, while “-chondr” refers to the cartilage joining the ribs to the sternum (the costal cartilages). The regions of the abdomen immediately inferior to these rib cartilages (on the left and right sides of the body) is what is being referred to

20.If a medical image displays internal anatomy in mid-sagittal section, which of the following describes the section?
A) A vertical section through the nose and umbilicus that divides the body into right and left halves.
B) A cross-section through the midriff at about the level of the liver.
C) A cross-section through the upper chest at about the level of the shoulders.
D) A vertical section through the midpoint of the clavicle and through either
the right or left thigh.
ANS: A
Explanation: A Sagittal section divides the body into left and right portions. A mid sagittal section means that the dividing line is in the vertical mid line of the body so that the halves are equal.

21.Which of the following best describes the “anatomical position”?
A) Standing vertically, arms held horizontally, legs apart so that the tips of the head, hands and feet lie on an imaginary circle, drawn around the body.
B) Standing “to attention”, with hands held so that thumbs are ventral while the fifth digit is dorsal.
C) Standing “at ease” with hands clasped behind your back while adjacent and dorsal to the sacrum.
D) Standing vertically, arms parallel and lateral to the ribs with hands inferior to the elbows and supinated.
ANS: D
Explanation: The anatomical position is achieved when standing with feet comfortably apart while displaying the ventral surface of the head, body and forearms to the same direction (forwards).

22.Which term describes the location of the adrenal glands with reference to the kidneys?
A) proximal
B) distal
C) superior
D) inferior
ANS: C
Explanation: The adrenal glands are on the cephalic side of the kidneys. Being closer to the head, they are termed “superior to the kidneys”.

23.Which of the following terms is NOT used to identify a region of the abdomen?
A) left hypochondriac
B) hypogastric
C) epigastric
D) right sacral
ANS: D
Explanation: Right sacral is not a region on the anterior surface of the abdomen.

24.What structure separates the thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity?
A) The mediastinum
B) The diaphragm
C) The peritoneum
D) The pylorus
ANS: B
Explanation: The muscular diaphragm physically separates these two ventral cavities.