1.The chemical formula C6H12O6 contains much information. However, what information is NOT provided by the formula?
A) the number of atoms in a molecule
B) the name of the substance
C) the elements that make up the substance
D) whether the substance is covalent or ionic
ANS: B
Explanation: the name may be guessed at, but it is possible for two substances to have the same formula but a different structure.

2.Which of the particles listed below is the smallest?
A) an atom
B) a proton
C) an ion
D) a molecule
ANS: B
Explanation: a proton is a sub-atomic particle so is smaller than all of the others

3.The chemical name for sodium is which of the following?
A) Na
B) So
C) K
D) Si
ANS: A
Explanation: Na is short for Natrium which is the Latin name for sodium.

4.A molecular compound may be defined by which of the following?
A) atoms from non-metal elements covalently bonded.
B) atoms from metal elements covalently bonded
C) atoms from metal elements and non-metal elements covalently bonded
D) atoms from non-metal elements ironically bonded
ANS: A
Explanation: only non-metal elements are involved in covalent (molecular)
bonding.

5.Many drugs are neutralised to form salts and administered in this form. What is the main advantage of administering the salt form of the drug? It is usually:
A) less toxic
B) more soluble in water
C) more pleasant to taste
D) more soluble in lipid
ANS: B
Explanation: salts, having particles that are electrically charged, are more likely to be soluble in water.

6.One of the following is INCORRECT. Which one?
A) metal atoms will form compounds with non-metal atoms.
B) metal atoms will form compounds with metal atoms.
C) non-metal atoms will form compounds with non-metal atoms.
D) metal atoms will not form compounds with metal atoms.
ANS: B
Explanation: metal atoms can only form (ionic non-molecular) compounds with non-metal atoms.

7.Choose the correct statement about hydrogen bonds. They
A) are stronger than covalent bonds.
B) act between the H in one –OH or –NH group, and the O or N in another.
C) operate within molecules.
D) act between the H in one –OH or –NH group, and the H in another.
ANS: B
Explanation: the slightly positive H atom in one molecule is attracted to the adjacent slightly negative O (or N).

8.Given that the atomic mass of nitrogen is 14 and of hydrogen is 1, what is the mass in grams of one mole of ammonia (NH3)
A) 15
B) 16
C) 17
D) 18
ANS: C
Explanation: from the formula, there is one N and three H atoms. So
(1 × 14) + (3 × 1) =

9.Choose the ending that will correctly complete the sentence: When atoms of a metal element and atoms of a non-metal element react, the result is
A) a covalent compound consisting of molecules
B) a covalent compound consisting of ions
C) an ionic compound consisting of ions in a lattice
D) an ionic compound consisting of molecules in a lattice
ANS: C
Explanation: atoms of a metal element react with atoms of a non-metal element to form an ionic compound (ions held within a lattice when in solid form).

10.In a water molecule, the bond between oxygen (O) and hydrogen (H) is
A) a covalent bond and a polar bond
B) an ionic bond
C) a covalent bond
D) an ionic bond and forms an electrolyte
ANS: A
Explanation: as both atoms are non-metals, the bonding is covalent. As the atoms differ in their attraction for the bonding electrons, the bond is polar (the electrons are more closely attracted to O).

11.Some atoms of potassium, K contain 19 protons and 20 neutrons in their nuclei.
What is the correct symbol for these atoms? A. 20
A) 20
B) 19
C) 39
D) 20
ANS: C
Explanation: the number of protons (the atomic number) is written as a sub- script. The sum of the number of protons and neutrons (the mass number) is written as a superscript.

12.The chemical elements can be divided into metal elements and non-metal ele- ments. Which of the statements about metals and non-metals is correct?
A) metals lose electrons to become charged particles called cations
B) most of the elements are non-metals.
C) non-metals are located at the left hand side of the periodic table
D) metals have low melting points and are good conductors of heat
ANS: A
Explanation: metal ions are positively charged (having lost an electron/s), con- sequently they are attracted to a cathode (a negatively charged electrode).

13.24 of the chemical elements are essential to the human body. Four bulk ele- ments, 7 are macrominerals and 13 are trace elements. Which are the four bulk elements?
A) calcium, carbon, hydrogen & oxygen
B) nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen & oxygen
C) calcium, nitrogen, carbon & oxygen
D) carbon, oxygen, phosphorus & iron
ANS: B
Explanation: these elements make up the bulk of proteins, carbohydrates and lipids.

14.Most non-molecular compounds form by the chemical combination of: A. molecules with molecules
A) molecules with molecules
B) non-metals with non-metals
C) metals with metals
D) metals with non-metals
ANS: D
Explanation: ionic compounds are formed when metal atoms react with non- metal atoms. The structures the form are not molecular.

15.Molecules are relatively easy to separate from one another. This means that the bonds between them are:
A) ionic
B) covalent
C) relatively weak
D) relatively strong
ANS: C
Explanation: ease of separation implies relatively weak bonds. Both ionic and covalent bonds are strong.

16.What happens when a sodium atom reacts to form a compound? The atom will
A) gain one electron
B) lose one electron
C) gain two electrons
D) lose two electrons
ANS: B
Explanation: sodium is a metal so will lose an electron. As it occurs in period
IA of the periodic table we know it loses a single electron.

17.When nitrogen combines with hydrogen to form a compound, its formula will be:
A) NH3
B) N3H
C) NH4
D) NH
ANS: A
Explanation: N requires 3 electrons to complete its outer shell (it occurs in column VA of the periodic table), while H requires one. Hence three H must attach to a single N.

18.Which of the following type of bond between atoms is the weakest?
A) ionic bond
B) polar bond
C) covalent bond
D) hydrogen bond
ANS: D
Explanation: the hydrogen bond is the weakest. Almost all covalent bonds are polar bonds.

19.Ionic, non-molecular compounds are likely to have which of the following sets of properties?
A) high melting point, often soluble in organic liquids, in pure form do not conduct electricity.
B) low melting point, no strong odour, soluble in water, electrical conductivity in solution.
C) high melting point, electrical conductivity in solution, no strong odour, often soluble in water
D) low melting point, strong odour, soluble in organic liquids, in pure form do not conduct electricity.
ANS: C
Explanation: high melting points and electrical conductivity are indicative of ionic compounds.

20.Which of the following best describes a molecule?
A) The simplest structure in an ionic compound.
B) One thousandth of a mole.
C) The particles of which covalent compounds are composed.
D) The smallest particle of an element.
ANS: C
Explanation: molecules are the particles of covalent compounds.

21.Which of the following is true of metal elements?
A) The four most common metal elements in the body have the symbols: C, H, O and N.
B) They form compounds with non-metals.
C) When they form compounds, they gain electrons.
D) In the body, ions of metal atoms have a negative charge. Answer is B: all other choices are wrong.
ANS: B
Explanation: all other choices are wrong.

22.Which of the following symbols represents a chemical element?
A) O
B) CO
C) CO2
D) H3O+
ANS: A
Explanation: O symbolises oxygen, element number

23.What is the name given to the particles that make up a covalent compound?
A) ions
B) molecules
C) anions and cations
D) metal atoms
ANS: B
Explanation: this is a definition of molecules.

24.Compounds may be described by which of the following sentences?
A) Pure substances that contain two or more elements.
B) Materials that are composed of particles called molecules.
C) Materials composed of more than one part, and the parts may be present in any proportion.
D) Substances that appear on the right hand side of the periodic table. Answer is A: choice B refers only to covalent compounds.
ANS: A
Explanation: choice B refers only to covalent compounds.

25.The symbol for potassium is which of the following?
A) PO4
B) Po
C) P
D) K
ANS: B
Explanation: K is from Kalium which is the Latin word for potassium.

26.“Covalent” is the term applied to which of the following bonds?
A) Those between an ion and all the surrounding oppositely charged ions.
B) The bond between an electrolyte and the surrounding water molecules in a solution.
C) Those between non-metal atoms.
D) Those between atoms on the left hand side of the periodic table.
ANS: C
Explanation: non-metals share electrons when they react with each other (rather than losing or gaining), hence the prefix “co-”.

27.Given that one mole is 6 × 1023 particles, how much is a millimole?
A) 6 × 1020 particles
B) 106 mole
C) 10-6 mole
D) 6 × 10-3 particles
ANS: A
Explanation: a millimole is one thousandth of a mole, so 1 mmol = 10−3 × 6 ×
1023 = 6 × 1020 particles

28.Which of the following is a definition of a molecule? The particle that composes:
A) covalent compounds
B) non-metal elements
C) electrolytes
D) ionic compounds
ANS: A
Explanation: This is one definition of a molecule.

29.What is the smallest particle of a non-metal element known as?
A) a molecule
B) an atom
C) an ion
D) a neutron
ANS: B
Explanation: an atom is the smallest particle of any element – not just non-metals!

30.What is the difference between ions and molecules?
A) ions have an electrical charge whereas molecules do not.
B) ions are from metal elements only whereas molecules contain only non- metal elements
C) ions arise from compounds between non-metal elements, whereas mole- cules arise from metal and non-metal elements
D) an ion may be formed from a single atom but molecules always involve more than one atom
ANS: D
Explanation: This is the only correct choice. However molecules may also form ions – polyatomic ions.

31.Of the four different types of matter listed below which is not an example of an element?
A) hydrogen
B) oxygen
C) water
D) gold
ANS: C
Explanation: water is a compound of H and O.

32.A certain pure substance, A, when heated is changed into two quite different pure substances, C and
D) Which of the following statements must be true?
A) A is a compound.
B) C and D are not elements.
C) A, C and D are all compounds.
ANS: A
Explanation: only this choice must be true. The others are just possible.

33.Which of the following statements about atoms is FALSE?
A) They are mostly empty space.
B) Nearly all their mass is concentrated in the nucleus.
C) In a neutral atom protons and electrons are equal in number.
D) The nucleus contains equal numbers of protons and neutrons.
ANS: D
Explanation: for the elements with smaller atoms, usually this is true, but for heavier elements it is not.

34.In which of the following sequences are particles listed in order of increasing size from left to right?
A) electron, atom, proton, molecule
B) molecule, atom, proton, electron
C) atom, proton, electron, molecule
D) electron, proton, atom, molecule
ANS: D
Explanation: an electron so far is immeasurably small, while a molecule must have at least two atoms and the proton is a sub-atomic particle.

35.Which of the following is the name of a subatomic particle?
A) anion
B) cation
C) molecule
D) neutron
ANS: D
Explanation: a neutron is one of the constituents of the atomic nucleus.

36.Two atoms have the same mass number but different atomic numbers. Which of the following statements concerning these atoms is TRUE?
A) Each has the same number of neutrons in its nucleus.
B) They are isotopes.
C) They are atoms of different elements.
D) Each has the same number of protons in its nucleus.
ANS: C
Explanation: different atomic numbers means different numbers of protons and hence different elements.

37.What is the atomic number of the element occupying Group VA and Period 4 of the Periodic Table?
A) 33
B) 34
C) 51
D) 52
ANS: C
Explanation: This is Arsenic (As) – you may need to consult a periodic table to answer this.

38.Some atoms of iodine, I, contain 53 protons and 78 neutrons in their nuclei. A
correct symbol for these atoms would be:
A) 53^(131)I
B) 53^(78)I
C) 78^(131)I
D) 78^(53)I
ANS: A
Explanation: the convention is: the number of protons is the subscript; the sum of the number of protons and neutrons (131) is the superscript.

39.Which of the following atoms normally forms ions having a single, positive charge?
A) Mg
B) S
C) Cl
D) K
ANS: D
Explanation: This is because potassium is a metal and from group IA of the periodic table.

40.Which of the following statements concerning isotopes is FALSE?
A) They contain the same number of protons in their atoms.
B) They contain the same number of electrons in their atoms.
C) They contain the same number of neutrons in their atoms.
D) They have very similar chemical properties.
ANS: C
Explanation: having a different number of neutrons (while having the same number of protons) is what defines them to be isotopes

41.The elements nitrogen exists as molecules, N2. Which of the following representations of the bonding in a molecule of nitrogen is correct?
A) N+ N-
B) N– N
C) N= N
D) N≡ N
ANS: D
Explanation: Nitrogen is placed in period VA of the periodic table and so needs to share three electrons. That is, needs to form three covalent bonds.

42.Which of the following properties is least likely to be possessed by a covalent, molecular substance?
A) strong odour
B) high solubility in water
C) melting point above 400 °C
D) low electrical conductivity
ANS: C
Explanation: A high melting point is characteristic of ionic substances. Some covalent compounds are soluble in water.
