1.Which of the following is NOT a bone of the axial skeleton?
A) deltoid
B) ethmoid
C) sphenoid
D) hyoid
ANS: A
Explaination: The “deltoid” does not exist. Choice D, the hyoid does not articulate with any bone, but being in the neck is considered part of the axial skeleton.

2.Which of the following is a function of the skeletal system?
A) haemopoiesis
B) haemostasis
C) peristalsis
D) glycogenolysis
ANS: A
Explaination: New red and white blood cells are made in the bone marrow (haemopoiesis). Haemostasis refers to stopping bleeding.

3.In which of the following bone structures do osteocytes live?
A) osteons
B) canaliculi
C) lacunae
D) lamellae
ANS: C
Explaination: Lacunae are the spaces within the lamellae of an osteon which enclose a bone cell (osteocyte). These cells extend their processes into the canaliculi.

4.Which bone is most superior?
A) manubrium
B) occipital bone
C) cervical vertebra #3
D) patella
ANS: B
Explaination: The occipital bone forms the base of the skull so is above (superior) to all the others when the body is in the anatomical position.

5.What is a “trochanter”?
A) part of a femur
B) a feature of the pelvis
C) a projection that forms part of an articulation
D) a groove in which lies a tendon
ANS: A
Explaination: the “greater” trochanter is a bone marking (a bump) that lies on the lateral surface of the proximal femur, while the “lesser” trochanter lies on the medial surface of the proximal femur.

6.One of the functions of bones is to make red blood cells. What is this process known as?
A) Haemolysis
B) Haemopoiesis
C) Haematuria
D) Haemostasis
ANS: B
Explaination: Haemopoiesis (or haematopoiesis) refers to making all of cellular components of blood. The other (wrong) choices are respectively: the rupturing (lysis) of rbc; blood in the urine; the process by which we cause bleeding to stop.

7.Where do osteocytes reside?
A) In lamellae
B) In endosteum
C) In trabeculae
D) In lacunae
ANS: D
Explaination: Lacunae are the spaces within the lamellae of an osteon which are occupied by a bone cell (osteocyte).

8.Which of the following describes the movements known as pronation and supination?
A) The flexing of the arm with respect to the forearm around the elbow.
B) The swivelling of the foot to the medial and lateral directions.
C) The twisting of the wrist while the elbow is held motionless.
D) The rotation at the shoulder that causes the arm to describe a cone shape.
ANS: C
Explaination: Pronation occurs when the radius is moved from a position parallel to the ulna to one where it crosses over the ulna and supination is the return motion (may be thought of as the action we perform when turning off a wallmounted tap).

9.Which of the following is NOT a “long” bone?
A) the humerus
B) the tibia
C) a carpal
D) a metacarpal
ANS: C
Explaination: A “long bone” has a length that is significantly longer than its width. A carpal (a bone of the wrist) is a short bone.

10.Which one of the following is a bone that is embedded within a tendon?
A) sphenoid
B) hyoid
C) ethmoid
D) sesamoid
ANS: D
Explaination: Sesamoid refers to like a sesame seed. Many are normal parts of anatomy that ossify within tendons (patella, fabella, hallux sesamoid).

11.In which one of the following structures do osteocytes reside? In the
A) haversian canals
B) lacunae
C) trabeculae
D) endosteum
ANS: B
Explaination: Lacuna refers to a hole, pit, “lake” or cavity within a bone.

12.Which bone of the head has a synovial joint?
A) The sphenoid
B) The maxilla
C) The mandible
D) The hyoid
ANS: C
Explaination: The ramus of the mandible articulates with the temporal bone at the mandibular fossa. The joint is freely moveable, allowing us to chew and speak.

13.What are the bones of the fingers known as?
A) short bones
B) metacarpals
C) carpals
D) phalanges
ANS: D
Explaination: Phalanges (singular phalanx) are the bones of the fingers or toes. Metacarpals are the bones of the hand.

14.Which of the following comprise seven bones?
A) Cervical vertebrae
B) Carpals
C) Cranial bones
D) Lumbar vertebrae
ANS: A
Explaination: C1 to C7. There are 8 carpals in each wrist. There are 8 cranial bones. There are 5 lumbar vertebrae.

15.Which term below refers to a depression in a bone?
A) tuberosity
B) fossa
C) tubercle
D) condyle
ANS: B
Explaination: Fossa is a depression reminiscent of a (small) dinner table plate. A tuberosity is a roughening on a bone surface. The other two choices are projections above a bone surface.

16.What body part is able to perform pronation and supination?
A) the forearm
B) the foot
C) the thigh
D) the wrist
ANS: A
Explaination: It is the radius and ulna bones whose movement relative to each other produce pronation and supination.

17.Where are blood vessels in compact bone found?
A) in the canaliculi
B) in the periosteum
C) in the lacunae
D) in the central canal
ANS: D
Explaination: the central canal (or haversian canal) of an osteon houses blood vessels

18.Which of the following is NOT a depression or cavity on a bone?
A) tuberosity
B) facet
C) meatus
D) sinus
ANS: A
Explaination: A tuberosity is a rough area on the surface of a bone to which a muscle’s tendon attaches.

19.One of the following lists contains only bones in the appendicular skeleton.
Which one?
A) patella, ethmoid, femur, coccyx, tibia
B) clavicle, fibula, metatarsal, phalange, radius
C) humerus, scapula, occipital, metacarpal, sternum
D) ulna, radius, phalange, mandible, coxal
ANS: B
Explaination: The coccyx, occipital, sternum, mandible are parts of the axial skeleton.

20.A synovial joint is also known as one of the following, which one?
A) synarthrosis
B) immovable joint
C) slightly moveable joint
D) freely moveable joint
ANS: D
Explaination: Synovial fluid is the lubricant that allows friction free joint movement. A synarthrosis is an immovable joint.

21.What is contained within the medullary canal of a long bone?
A) trabeculae
B) lamellae
C) marrow
D) osteoblasts and osteoclasts
ANS: C
Explaination: Red (and/or yellow) marrow fills the medullary canal (or cavity).

22.Where in the skeleton is the scapula located?
A) in the axial skeleton
B) in the appendicular skeleton
C) in the carpal region
D) in the shoulder girdle
ANS: D
Explaination: The scapula (shoulder blade) is part of the shoulder girdle. It is also part of the appendicular skeleton, but choice D is the more specific answer.

23.Which of the following bone markings forms part of an articulation?
A) the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus
B) the lateral condyle of the femur
C) the greater trochanter of the femur
D) the greater tubercule of the humerus
ANS: B
Explaination: The lateral condyle of the femur articulates with the lateral facet of the superior articular surface of the tibia, in the knee joint.

24.Where is the epiphyseal plate of a long bone located?
A) in the diaphysis
B) between the diaphysis and the epiphysis
C) in the epiphysis
D) in the medullary canal
ANS: B
Explaination: The “plate” is the hyaline cartilage between the shaft (diaphysis) and end (epiphysis) of a long bone in children and adolescents. In adults it is replaced by an ossified “epiphyseal line”.

25.In which structure are osteoclasts and osteoblasts found?
A) in the periosteum
B) in the haversian canals
C) in the lacunae of osteons
D) in the trabeculae of osteons
ANS: A
Explaination: The membrane around bones houses the bone forming cells (osteoblasts) and the bone reabsorbing cells (osteoclasts).

26.Which of the following is a NOT a projection from a bone surface?
A) trochanter
B) tubercle
C) trabeculum
D) tuberosity
ANS: C
Explaination: A trabeculum (plural trabeculae) is the internal bony structure of spongy (cancellous) bone.

27.Which of the listed bones is superior to the rest?
A) manubrium
B) xiphoid process
C) coccyx
D) femur
ANS: A
Explaination: The manubrium is the upper part of the sternum. The xiphoid process is the lower part.

28.Choose the correct sentence. Compact bone contains
A) lamellae and osteocytes but no osteons.
B) trabeculae, canaliculi and osteons.
C) haversian systems and canaliculi but no osteons.
D) osteons and lamellae but no trabeculae.
ANS: D
Explaination: Compact bone does contain osteons, but not trabeculae (which occur in cancellous bone).

29.Which of the following bone markings is NOT a projection for muscle attachment?
A) fossa
B) tuberosity
C) tubercle
D) trochanter
ANS: A
Explaination: A fossa is a depression into which fits a projecting part of another bone when the two bones form a joint.

30.Which of the list below is a cell that reabsorbs bone?
A) osteon
B) osteoblast
C) osteocyte
D) osteoclast
ANS: D
Explaination: The suffix “-blast” refers to an immature cell. In this case it develops into an osteocyte after it has secreted bone matrix around itself.

31.The formula for the inorganic salts in bone is
A) NH6C3COOH
B) C6H12O6
C) Ca10(PO4)6OH2
D) CH3(CH2)7CH = CH(CH2)7COOH
ANS: C
Explaination: This is hydroxyapatite. It is the only one with calcium and phosphorus. All the others are organic molecules.

32.Freely moveable joints are also known as
A) fibrous joints
B) cartilaginous joints
C) amphiarthroses
D) synovial joints
ANS: D
Explaination: Synovial joints have synovial fluid between the articulating bones. Fibrous joints have fibre between the articulating bones. Cartilaginous joints have cartilage between the bones. Amphiarthroses are “slightly moveable” joints.

33.Which of the following is a projection from a bone surface?
A) fossa
B) fissure
C) foramen
D) facet
ANS: D
Explaination: Facet is an articular surface that projects from a bone surface. A fossa is a shallow basin-like depression in a bone, often serving as articular surface.

34.Which of the listed bones is the most inferior?
A) ethmoid
B) sphenoid
C) femoid
D) hyoid
ANS: D
Explaination: Hyoid is in the neck. Choice A & B are in the skull. Femoid is not a bone.

35.Choose the correct sentence. Cancellous bone contains
A) lamellae and osteocytes but no trabeculae.
B) trabeculae, canaliculi and osteons.
C) haversian systems and canaliculi but no osteons.
D) trabeculae and lamellae but no osteons.
ANS: D
Explaination: Cancellous (spongy) bone does not contain osteons, but does contain the little beams known as trabeculae.

36.Which of the following bones is part of the cranium?
A) occipital
B) mandible
C) hyoid
D) carpal
ANS: A
Explaination: the occipital bone forms the floor of the cranium.

37.The appendicular skeleton includes all of the following EXCEPT one. Which one?
A) the pectoral girdle
B) the thoracic cage
C) the phalanges
D) the lower limbs
ANS: B
Explaination: The thoracic cage (the ribs) are part of the axial skeleton.

38.What is the name given to the central tunnel of an osteon that contains blood vessels?
A) canaliculus
B) endosteum
C) haversian canal
D) medullary canal
ANS: C
Explaination: Also known as the central canal. The medullary canal is a macroscopic structure within the diaphysis (shaft) of a long bone.

39.Which of the following is an example of a synovial joint? The joint between the:
A) tibia and fibula
B) sternum and rib number 1
C) thoracic vertebrae 4 and 5
D) proximal ends of the radius and ulna
ANS: D
Explaination: The radius and ulna are freely moving at the elbow joint.

40.Which list contains the bones of the pelvic and pectoral girdles?
A) coxal, scapulae, manubrium, ilium
B) clavicles, cervical, coccyx, innominate
C) clavicles, scapulae, coxal
D) clavicles, scapulae, sacrum, coxal
ANS: C
Explaination: The manubrium, coccyx, sacrum are within the axial skeleton.

41.Synovial joints have all of the following features EXCEPT one. Which one?
A) are surrounded by an articular capsule.
B) have synovial fluid filling the space between articulating bones.
C) have synovial membrane covering the articulating bone surfaces.
D) are supported by reinforcing ligaments.
ANS: C
Explaination: Articulating bone surfaces are covered by hyaline cartilage. Synovial membranes covers all other internal joint surfaces.

42.The manubrium and the xiphoid process are located on which part of the skeleton?
A) the lower jaw
B) the sternum
C) the pelvis
D) the hand
ANS: B
Explaination: The manubrium and xiphoid process (and the body) are all parts of the sternum.

43.Carpals refers to
A) the points of attachment of ribs to vertebrae
B) bones of the wrist
C) bones that are embedded within a tendon
D) the thumbs
ANS: B
Explaination: Wrist bones are carpals, hand bones are metacarpals (ankle bones are tarsals).

44.Haemopoiesis refers to
A) blood cell formation in bone marrow
B) the process of blood clotting
C) the crenation of red blood cells in a hypotonic solution
D) an excessively large proportion of red blood cells to plasma.
ANS: A
Explaination: While the prefix “Haemo” refers to blood, the “-poiesis” part means making (or forming).

45.Articulating bones are joined by
A) aponeuroses
B) tendons
C) fasciculi
D) ligaments
ANS: D
Explaination: ligaments join bone to bone. Tendons (and aponeuroses) join muscle to bone.

46.On which bone is the greater trochanter found?
A) pelvic
B) femur
C) radius
D) humerus
ANS: B
Explaination: Only the femur has a structure named “trochanter”.

47.What does “articulation” refer to?
A) the joining of a ligament to a bone.
B) the contact made between a tendon and a bone
C) the contact between two bones.
D) the connection between a muscle and a bone
ANS: C
Explaination: Articulation means joint between bones.

48.To which bones does the word phalanges apply? Those in the
A) fingers and toes
B) wrist and ankle
C) ankle and foot
D) fingers and hand
ANS: A
Explaination: Choice B refers to carpals and tarsals. Choices C & D include metacarpals and metatarsals.

49.The axial skeleton groups together which sets of bones?
A) the arms and hands, the legs and feet, shoulder girdle and pelvic girdle.
B) the head, shoulder girdle, arms and hands.
C) the thoracic cage, vertebral column, shoulder girdle, the pelvic girdle, the skull and facial bones.
D) bones of the skull and face, thoracic cage and vertebral column.
ANS: D
Explaination: Choice A describes the appendicular skeleton. Choices A & D are complementary.

50.How do synovial joints differ from the other types of bone articulation?
A) they have a joint cavity.
B) the bones are joined by fibrous tissue.
C) the articulating bones are joined by cartilage.
D) the articulating bone surfaces are covered by tendons.
ANS: A
Explaination: And the cavity is filled with synovial fluid. Choice D is nonsense.

51.What are the cells that are found in the lacunae of compact bone called?
A) osteocytes.
B) osteons.
C) osteoblasts.
D) osteoclasts.
ANS: A
Explaination: Osteocytes develop from osteoblasts.

52.The appendicular skeleton groups together which sets of bones?
A) the arms and hands, the legs and feet, shoulder girdle and pelvic girdle.
B) the head, shoulder girdle, arms and hands.
C) the thoracic cage, vertebral column, shoulder girdle, the pelvic girdle, the skull and facial bones.
D) bones of the skull and face, thoracic cage and vertebral column.
ANS: A
Explaination: The appendages (arms and legs) and the girdles form the appendicular skeleton.

53.Synovial joints differ from the other types of joint between bones in the body because:
A) they are immovable joints.
B) they are slightly moveable
C) the bones are joined by cartilage.
D) the ends of the articulating bones are covered by hyaline cartilage.
ANS: D
Explaination: Hyaline cartilage is very smooth which (along with synovial fluid) makes the movement of the articulating bones almost friction free.

54.What does the term “haversian canal” refer to in bone?
A) the larger examples of foramina.
B) a groove that receives a muscle’s tendon.
C) the centre of an osteon that contains blood capillaries.
D) the space within a long bone that contains marrow.
ANS: C
Explaination: Named after the English physician Clopton Havers. Also known as the central canal.

55.What is the structure that attaches one bone to another?
A) ligament
B) cartilage
C) tendon
D) diaphysis
ANS: A
Explaination: A ligament is the fibrous connective tissue that ties articulating bones together.

56.Which of the following describes what an “epiphysis” is?
A) The shaft of a long bone.
B) The line that separates the shaft from the end of a long bone.
C) The membrane that surrounds a bone.
D) The end of a long bone.
ANS: D
Explaination: The similar terms “epiphyseal plate” refers to the region between the diaphysis and the epiphysis where growth of a long bone takes place. The “epiphyseal line” replaces the plate in adults, when the long bone has ceased to grow.

57.To what does the term “osteon” refer in bone?
A) the bone cells (osteocytes) in lacunae.
B) a small rounded projection on a bone.
C) concentric cylinders of calcified bone matrix.
D) the membrane covering the outside of a bone.
ANS: C
Explaination: These concentric cylinders surround a central canal (Haversian canal) and occur in compact bone.

58.Blood cell formation (haemopoiesis) occurs in which of the following structures?
A) red marrow
B) yellow marrow
C) medullary cavity
D) epiphyseal plate
ANS: A
Explaination: Red marrow is “active” marrow, in that blood cells are being formed there. Red marrow occurs in the medullary cavity as well as in the cancellous bone of the epiphyses.

59.Compact bone differs from spongy (cancellous) bone because compact bone: A. does not contain osteons
A) does not contain osteons
B) is used to form short bones
C) contains marrow
D) has Haversian canals
ANS: D
Explaination: Osteons are the structural units of compact bone and each one surrounds a channel, called a Haversion canal, which contains blood vessels.

60.What is the role of hyaline cartilage in the body?
A) it attaches muscle to bone.
B) it reinforces joints by tying one bone to another.
C) it covers articulating bone surfaces.
D) it produces synovial fluid.
ANS: C
Explaination: Hyaline cartilage is very smooth, and by covering the articulating surfaces of bones, ensures that the joint moves without noticeable friction.

61.What are bone forming cells called?
A) osteons
B) osteocytes
C) osteoclasts
D) osteoblasts
ANS: D
Explaination: Osteoblasts secrete bone around themselves, eventually isolating themselves within lacunae, whereupon they mature into osteocytes.

62.Where does the increase in the length of a long bone take place? At the : A. diaphysis ossification centres
A) diaphysis ossification centres
B) epiphyseal plates
C) cartilaginous plates
D) medullary canal
ANS: B
Explaination: Bone is deposited on the side of the plate that is distal to the epiphysis while bone is removed from the proximal side. In this way the diaphysis increases in length (and is remodelled)

63.The human skeleton consists of which of the following?
A) pectoral girdle, the hip girdle and the bones of the limbs.
B) axial skeleton and the appendicular skeleton.
C) cranial bones, the thoracic cage, the two girdles and the limb bones.
D) appendicular skeleton, skull bones and the vertebral skeleton.
ANS: B
Explaination: Choice A omits the axial skeleton. Choice C omits the facial bones and lumbar vertebrae. Choice D omits the ribs.

64.The functions of bones may be stated as:
A) fat storage, movement, mineral storage, protection, blood cell formation.
B) mineral storage, haemopoiesis, movement, leverage, protection.
C) blood cell formation, hormone production, movement, support, protection.
D) support, storage, movement, haemopoiesis, protection
ANS: D
Explaination: Each choice includes: protection, movement and blood cell formation (haemopoiesis) so these terms cannot be used to choose the answer. Bones do not produce hormones, so choice C is eliminated. Bones do provide support to the body, hence only choice D is a complete list of functions.

65.What is true of synovial joints? They: A. are also known as amphiarthroses
A) are also known as amphiarthroses
B) all have an articular disc to aid shock absorption.
C) have a fluid-filled space between the articulating bones.
D) have articulating bones held together by cartilage.
ANS: C
Explaination: The fluid is synovial fluid. Amphiarthroses are “slightly moveable” joints whereas synovial joints are freely moveable.

66.The tibia articulates distally with which one of the following?
A) tarsals
B) metatarsals
C) phalanges
D) femur
ANS: A
Explaination: Distal refers to the end that is further away from the trunk. Hence the ankle bones (tarsals) is the correct choice.

67.Which of the following is an amphiarthrotic joint?
A) symphysis pubis
B) suture in the skull
C) elbow
D) shoulder
ANS: A
Explaination: Choice B is an immovable joint, while choices C & D are freely moveable synovial (diarthrotic) joints.

68.What is the term “osteon” used for?
A) a bone cell
B) an Haversian system in compact bone
C) the bony structure in spongy bone
D) the space in a bone where a bone cell lives.
ANS: B
Explaination: Osteon and Haversian system are synonyms. A Haversian canal (central canal) is at the centre of the Haversian system.

69.In a long bone, which of the following parts are involved in an articulation?
A) epiphysis
B) metaphysis
C) diaphysis
D) symphysis
ANS: A
Explaination: Epiphysis refers to the end of a long bone. The ends articulate with adjacent bones.

70.Hypochondriac refers to which of the following?
A) someone who complains chronically of ill health
B) the abdominal region inferior to your ribs
C) an abnormally low level of chondria in the body
D) that part of your head surrounding your chin.
ANS: B
Explaination: “Hypo-”refers to below (or inferior to), chondra refers to cartilage – specifically the costal cartilages that join ribs 7 to 10 to the sternum. The abdomen immediately inferior to the rib cage is being referred to. Choices C & D are nonsense. While choice A is true in layman’s terms, we are dealing with anatomical terminology here.

71.Where are the bones known as the humerus and radius located?
A) in the axial skeleton
B) in the arm
C) in the leg
D) in the arm and leg respectively
ANS: B
Explaination: This is a better answer than the also true choice A.

72.Where does blood cell formation occur? In the
A) blood
B) endosteum
C) Haversian canal
D) red marrow
ANS: D
Explaination: Red marrow is actively forming blood cells. Yellow marrow is inactive.

73.On what bone does the acetabulum occur?
A) occipital
B) humerus
C) pelvis
D) tibia
ANS: C
Explaination: The acetabulum is the “socket” into which fits the ball of the femur.

74.Where is the xiphoid process?
A) on the sternum
B) on the humerus
C) on the temporal bone
D) on the tibia
ANS: A
Explaination: At the inferior end of the body of the sternum. The temporal bone has a mastoid and a styloid process.

75.What is the metaphysis?
A) the shaft of a long bone.
B) the region that separates the narrow shaft of a long bone from its end.
C) the end of a long bone.
D) the canal inside a long bone that contains marrow.
ANS: B
Explaination: The metaphysis is the bony component of the growth plate. The cartilaginous remnant of the growth plate is the epiphyseal plate.

76.What is a distinguishing feature of synovial joints?
A) there is fluid between the articulating bones
B) they are immovable joints
C) the articulating bones are held together by tendons
D) they involve a “ball and socket” articulation
ANS: A
Explaination: The fluid is synovial fluid. Ball & socket joints are synovial, but are only one type of synovial joint.

77.What term is applied to moving the thigh laterally away from the midline of the body?
A) extension
B) adduction
C) abduction
D) flexion
ANS: C
Explaination: “Abduct” is to take away (from the midline).

78.Where is the hyoid bone?
A) in the sternum
B) in the wrist
C) in the knee
D) in the neck
ANS: D
Explaination: It is just superior to the cricoid cartilage, inferior to the mandible and superficial to the pharynx. Also known as the lingual (tongue) bone.

79.What is the occipital bone?
A) it is one of the carpals
B) it is a bone of the cranium
C) it is one of the vertebrae
D) it is a facial bone
ANS: B
Explaination: The Occipital bone forms the base of the cranium.

80.What is a “foramen”?
A) a basin-like depression serving as an articular surface.
B) a raised roughening which is a site for muscle attachment.
C) a hole through a bone for a nerve or blood vessel.
D) a sharp slender projection of bone.
ANS: C
Explaination: Nerves and blood vessels penetrate through bone via these spaces.

81.Which statement correctly defines an osteon?
A) the arrangement of trabeculae and osteocytes that make up spongy bone.
B) the membrane that lines the medullary cavity.
C) concentric cylinders of calcified bone matrix.
D) the distal or proximal end of a long bone.
ANS: C
Explaination: In two dimensions osteons appear as circles or ovals under the microscope, while in three dimensions, they are cylindrical.
