1.Which statement below about hormones is true?
A) Hormones are enzymes that catalyse reactions
B) Hormones are released into the blood circulation
C) Hormones affect all cells of the body
D) Hormones are released by neurones at synapses
ANS: B
Explaination: Hormones are circulating messengers that are transported in blood. A particular hormone does not necessarily affect every cell in the body. Some (but not all) hormones are released by neurones, for example in the hypothalamus.

2.Which hormones are soluble in blood?
A) Steroid hormones
B) Hormones produced by the adrenal cortex
C) The sex hormones
D) Those released by the pituitary gland
ANS: D
Explaination: The pituitary gland releases peptide hormones which are soluble in blood. The other choices refer to steroid hormones which are insoluble in blood. They require transport via plasma proteins.

3.Which statement about the hypothalamus is correct?
A) The hypothalamus is connected to the brain by the infundibulum
B) The hypothalamus is composed of glandular epithelial tissue
C) The hypothalamus secretes “releasing hormones”
D) The hypothalamus secretes epinephrine and norepinephrine
ANS: C
Explaination: The hypothalamus is part of the brain so is composed of neural tissue. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are released from the adrenal medulla.

4.What hormone does the thyroid produce?
A) thyroid stimulating hormone
B) calcitriol
C) thyroxine
D) parathyroid hormone
ANS: C
Explaination: Thyroxine (or tetra-iodothyronine) is converted to tri-iodothyronine in target tissues.

5.What hormone(s) does the adrenal medulla produce?
A) aldosterone
B) epinephrine and norepinephrine
C) corticosteroids
D) glucocorticoids
ANS: B
Explaination: Epinephrine and norepinephrine are produced in the adrenal medulla (the deep or inside part). Aldosterone is a mineralocorticoid, which like corticosteroids & glucocorticoids, as the “cortico” in the name suggests, are all produced in the adrenal cortex.

6.What is produced by the beta cells of the pancreas?
A) angiotensin converting enzyme
B) glucocorticoids
C) glucagon
D) insulin
ANS: D
Explaination: Beta cells of the pancreatic islets produce insulin. The alpha cells produce glucagon.

7.Which gland or organ releases erythropoietin?
A) The kidneys
B) The adrenal glands
C) The anterior pituitary
D) The pancreas
ANS: A
Explaination: Kidneys produce erythropoietin (EPO) – which signals red bone marrow to increase production of rbc.

8.What effect does parathyroid hormone have?
A) It increases plasma Ca2+ concentration
B) It decreases plasma Ca2+ concentration
C) It increases the rate of ATP formation
D) It stimulates the thyroid gland to produce thyroxine
ANS: A
Explaination: PTH increases plasma Ca2+. (calcitonin aids in lowering blood calcium).

9.Which one of the following is NOT part of the endocrine system?
A) the islets of Langerhans (pancreatic islets)
B) the thyroid gland
C) the acini cells of the pancreas
D) the parathyroid glands
ANS: C
Explaination: The acini cells produce digestive enzymes.

10.What is the difference between an exocrine gland and an endocrine gland?
A) An endocrine gland secretes neurotransmitters (an exocrine gland does not).
B) An endocrine gland secretes via a tube to the destination (an exocrine gland does not).
C) An exocrine gland secretes into the blood (an endocrine gland does not).
D) An endocrine gland secretes into the blood (an exocrine gland does not).
ANS: D
Explaination: Endocrine glands secrete “circulating” hormones, that is secrete into the blood.

11.By what term are hormones derived from tyrosine also known?
A) amino acid derivatives
B) peptide hormones
C) steroid hormones
D) corticosteroids
ANS: A
Explaination: Catecholamines (adrenaline, noradrenaline), dopamine and thyroid hormone are all derived from tyrosine.

12.Which hormones have their receptors inside their target cell?
A) amino acid based hormones
B) hormones with a membrane carrier mechanism or that are lipid soluble
C) steroid hormones and peptide hormones of less than 50 amino acids
D) lipid soluble hormones
ANS: B
Explaination: Choice D is also correct but B is the better answer as thyroid hormones cross membrane by a carrier mechanism.

13.Where in the body is the hypothalamus located?
A) On the inferior surface of the brain
B) In the cortex of the adrenal gland
C) In the anterior pituitary gland
D) On the dorsal surface of the thyroid gland
ANS: A
Explaination: The hypothalamus is below the thalamus, more or less on the “floor” of the brain, but above the pituitary gland.

14.From where are antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin released?
A) the anterior pituitary
B) the posterior pituitary
C) the adrenal cortex
D) the adrenal medulla
ANS: B
Explaination: ADH & OT are produced in the hypothalamus and transported to the posterior pituitary.

15.Which hormone has the element iodine as part of its molecule?
A) calcitonin
B) haemoglobin
C) thyroxine
D) parathyroid hormone
ANS: C
Explaination: Thyroxine or thyroid hormone contains iodine.

16.What effect does aldosterone have?
A) It causes glucose to be absorbed from the blood
B) It cause Na+ to be absorbed in the kidneys
C) It causes Ca++ to be absorbed from the gut
D) It causes K+ to be absorbed from the filtrate.
ANS: B
Explaination: Aldosterone cases reclamation of sodium ions from the filtrate, and potassium to be secreted in exchange.

17.Which of the following is a part of the endocrine system?
A) the thalamus
B) the pancreatic islets (islets of Langerhans)
C) the renal glands
D) the salivary glands
ANS: B
Explaination: The pancreatic islets secrete the hormones insulin and glucagon.

18.Which of the following is an amino acid derivative hormone?
A) epinephrine
B) tyrosine
C) testosterone
D) prostaglandin
ANS: A
Explaination: Epinephrine is derived from the amino acid tyrosine (so tyrosine is a wrong answer)

19.Which statement below is true of steroid hormones?
A) they do not have a specific receptor to bind with.
B) they are not lipid soluble do bind to receptor proteins on the cell membrane.
C) they are lipid soluble so diffuse through the cell membrane.
D) they cross the cell membrane via a carrier mechanism.
ANS: C
Explaination: Steroids are lipid soluble so diffuse through the plasma membrane to bind to a receptor within the cell.

20.Which structure controls the endocrine system and integrates the activities of the nervous and endocrine systems?
A) the infundibulum
B) the pituitary gland
C) the thalamus
D) the hypothalamus
ANS: D
Explaination: Hypothalamus secretes regulatory hormones that control endocrine cells in the ant.pit. gland; produces ADH & oxytocin; contains “autonomic centres” that exert neural control over endocrine cells of the adrenal medullae.

21.One of the statements below is true. Which one?
A) the anterior pituitary produces testosterone from cholesterol and releases it when releasing hormones arrive from the hypothalamus.
B) the hypothalamus produces ADH and oxytocin which are stored in the posterior pituitary.
C) the posterior pituitary contains autonomic centres that exert neural control over the adrenal glands.
D) the thalamus produces ADH and oxytocin which are stored in the anterior pituitary
ANS: B
Explaination: Testosterone is not produced in the pituitary, nor does the pituitary contain autonomic centres.

22.Iodine is an essential component of which hormone?
A) thyroid hormones
B) aldosterone
C) thyroid stimulating hormones
D) parathyroid hormone
ANS: A
Explaination: Thyroid hormones T3 and T4 contain 3 & 4 iodine atoms respectively.

23.Which hormone(s) increases the reabsorption of Ca++ from the filtrate in the kidney tubule?
A) calcitonin
B) mineralocorticoids
C) parathyroid hormone
D) aldosterone
ANS: C
Explaination: PTH causes increased calcium absorption and hence increases blood calcium level.

24.What effect does aldosterone have? It causes:
A) angiotensin to be formed from angiotensinogen
B) Na+ to be absorbed from the filtrate
C) Na+ and Ca++ to be absorbed from the filtrate and K+ to be secreted into the filtrate
D) Na+ to be absorbed from the filtrate and K+ to be secreted into the filtrate
ANS: D
Explaination: Aldosterone promotes the absorption of sodium from the filtrate while potassium (also a positively charged ion) is secreted to maintain electrical neutrality.

25.Which of the following is NOT part of the endocrine system?
A) The thymus
B) The pineal gland
C) The acini cells of the pancreas
D) The posterior pituitary gland
ANS: C
Explaination: The acini cells produce digestive enzymes.

26.Peptide hormones are produced (and/or released) by which structure?
A) The adrenal cortex
B) The gonads
C) The hypothalamus
D) The kidneys
ANS: C
Explaination: The hypothalamus produces peptide hormones.

27.Which statement applies to steroid hormones?
A) They are transported dissolved in blood
B) They bind to receptor proteins on the outside of the plasma membrane
C) They cross the plasma membrane by using a protein carrier mechanism.
D) They bind to receptors in the cell cytoplasm or nucleus
ANS: D
Explaination: As steroid hormones are lipid soluble, their receptors are inside the cell as they can cross the plasma membrane.

28.Which endocrine organ produces “releasing hormones” and “inhibitory hormones”?
A) thyroid
B) anterior pituitary
C) hypothalamus
D) thalamus
ANS: C
Explaination: The hypothalamus controls the secretion of the anterior pituitary by the use of “releasing hormones” and “inhibitory hormones”.

29.What hormone is produced by the parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland?
A) Parathyroid hormone
B) Calcitonin
C) Thyroid hormone
D) Thyroxine
ANS: B
Explaination: Parafollicular (or “C”) cells of the thyroid produce calcitonin which aids in lowering of blood calcium.

30.What hormones are produced by the adrenal medulla?
A) Epinephrine and norepinephrine
B) Insulin and glucagon
C) Aldosterone and erythropoietin
D) Testosterone and estrogen
ANS: A
Explaination: The medulla is the deeper part if the adrenal gland.

31.What is one mechanism of hormone action?
A) They act as second messengers in the cytoplasm
B) They act as enzymes for reactions
C) They act as receptor proteins
D) They activate genes in the nucleus
ANS: D
Explaination: Some hormones (corticosteroids) determine which genes are transcribed in the nucleus.

32.What is the effect of ADH (antidiuretic hormone)?
A) allows walls of collecting duct to become permeable to water
B) inhibits the reabsorption of Na+
C) causes an increase in the volume of urine produced
D) it promotes diuresis
ANS: A
Explaination: ADH causes more aquaporins to be inserted into the collecting duct walls which allow water molecules to pass through along the osmotic gradient.

33.Which one of the following is NOT true of peptide hormones?
A) they are water soluble
B) they are derived from amino acids
C) their receptors are located in the cell cytoplasm
D) they are transported dissolved in blood
ANS: C
Explaination: The receptors for peptide hormones are located on the plasma membrane as they are unable to penetrate the plasma membrane.

34.Which hormones are produced by the adrenal medulla?
A) gonadocorticoids
B) steroid hormones
C) mineralocorticoids
D) catecholamines
ANS: D
Explaination: Epinephrine and norepinephrine (=catecholamines) are produced in the adrenal medulla.

35.How do steroid hormones differ from amino acid-based hormones?
A) steroid hormones are water soluble whereas amino acid based hormones are not.
B) the receptors for steroid hormones are only in the cytoplasm or the nucleus (and amino acid-based hormones are not)
C) steroid hormones are made only in the adrenal glands, while amino acid based hormones are produced by a variety of glands.
D) steroid hormones activate a G-protein and exert their effect via “second messengers”, but the action of amino acid-based hormones results directly on binding to their receptor.
ANS: B
Explaination: Steroid hormones are lipid soluble so can enter the cell to bind to receptors located inside the cell. Amino acid-based hormones are not lipid soluble so their receptors are located outside the cell on the plasma membrane.

36.Which structure integrates the activities of the endocrine system and the nervous system?
A) the hypothalamus
B) the thalamus
C) the posterior pituitary
D) the anterior pituitary
ANS: A
Explaination: The hypothalamus is located in the brain and also produces regulatory hormones.

37.Which structure produces ADH and oxytocin?
A) the thalamus
B) the anterior pituitary
C) the hypothalamus
D) the posterior pituitary
ANS: C
Explaination: ADH and OT are then transported to the posterior pituitary for storage and release.

38.Which structure is composed of glandular epithelial tissue?
A) the thalamus
B) the anterior pituitary
C) the posterior pituitary
D) the hypothalamus
ANS: B
Explaination: The anterior pituitary produces and releases 6 hormones.

39.Which hormone is the one made in greatest quantity by the thyroid gland?
A) calcitonin
B) thyroid stimulating hormone
C) tri-iodothyronine
D) thyroxine
ANS: D
Explaination: thyroxine is about 90 % tetra-iodothyronine and 10 % tri-iodothyronine

40.Which of the following organ(s) are NOT endocrine organs?
A) renal
B) adrenal
C) thyroid
D) parathyroid
ANS: A
Explaination: Renal gland is another name for the kidney.

41.To which group of hormones does aldosterone belong?
A) catecholamines
B) glucocorticoids
C) mineralocorticoids
D) gonadocorticoids
ANS: C
Explaination: As aldosterone is concerned with the absorption of sodium ions, a “mineral” and it is produced by the adrenal cort ex, it is termed a mineralocorticoid.

42.Where are the receptors for almost all of the amino acid derived hormones located?
A) on the mitochondria
B) in the nucleus
C) on the outside of the plasma membrane
D) on the inside of the plasma membrane
ANS: C
Explaination: Amino acid-derived hormones cannot get through the plasma membrane so they attach to receptors located on the outside of the membrane.

43.Which structure produces the hormones ADH and oxytocin?
A) the posterior pituitary
B) the anterior pituitary
C) the thalamus
D) the hypothalamus
ANS: D
Explaination: ADH & OT are produced in the hypothalamus and are then transported to the posterior pituitary for release.

44.The hypothalamus produces “releasing hormones”. What do these releasing hormones do?
A) They direct the posterior pituitary to release hormones.
B) They direct the anterior pituitary to release hormones.
C) They direct the gonads to release hormones.
D) They act as “second messengers” when hormones bind to their receptor site.
ANS: B
Explaination: The anterior pituitary produces hormones that stimulate other endocrine organs, but the ant pit dos not release hormones until directed to the hypothalamus.

45.What is the role of glucagon and insulin?
A) glucagon raises blood glucose level and inhibits gluconeogenesis.
B) glucagon lowers blood glucose level and stimulates glycogenolysis.
C) insulin raises blood glucose level and stimulates gluconeogenesis
D) insulin lowers blood glucose level inhibits glycogenolysis.
ANS: D
Explaination: Insulin promotes the uptake of glucose into cells from the blood. Hence it lowers blood glucose. It also inhibits glycogenolysis so less glucose is released from the glycogen store.

46.Which of the following hormones CANNOT cross the plasma membrane?
A) sex hormones
B) amino acid based hormones
C) thyroid hormones
D) steroids
ANS: B
Explaination: amino acid-based hormones are water soluble but not lipid soluble, so cannot cross the plasma membrane.

47.Which of the following “controls” the endocrine system?
A) the posterior pituitary
B) the thalamus
C) the anterior pituitary
D) the hypothalamus
ANS: D
Explaination: The hypothalamus secretes releasing h. & inhibitory hormones that stimulate the anterior pituitary gland to secrete hormones which in turn control the activities of endocrine cells in the thyroid; cortex of adrenal glands; & reproductive organs. The hypothalamus produces ADH & oxytocin which are stored and released into blood from post.pit. The hypothalamus exerts neural control over the adrenal medullae.

48.Which part of the pituitary gland is comprised of neural tissue?
A) the posterior pituitary
B) the pars intermedia
C) the adenohypophysis
D) the anterior pituitary
ANS: A
Explaination: The posterior pituitary is part of the brain.

49.Complete the sentence correctly. Parathyroid hormone:
A) is produced by the parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland
B) decreases the concentration of Ca++ in the blood
C) releases Ca++ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum 
D) increases the concentration of Ca++ in the blood.
ANS: D
Explaination: When the level of calcium in the blood is lower than required, PTH is released and causes the calcium concentration to increase.

50.The adrenal medulla produces which of the following?
A) weak androgens
B) mineralocorticoids
C) testosterone and oestrogen
D) epinephrine and norepinephrine
ANS: D
Explaination: The adrenal cortex produces weak androgens and mineralocorticoids.

51.What effect does insulin have?
A) it increases metabolic rate
B) it causes the breakdown of glycogen to glucose
C) it lowers blood sugar level
D) it stimulates gluconeogenesis
ANS: C
Explaination: Glucose stimulates enhanced membrane transport of glucose into body cells, and inhibits glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. This lowers blood glucose level.

52.Which of the following is a substantial difference between amino acid based hormones and steroid hormones?
A) endocrine glands release steroid hormones while amino acid hormones are released from exocrine glands.
B) amino acid hormones are circulating hormones while steroid hormones are local hormones.
C) amino acid hormones are fat soluble while steroid hormones are not.
D) steroid hormones can pass through the plasma membrane while amino acid hormones cannot.
ANS: D
Explaination: Steroid hormones are fat soluble, AA-based hormones are water soluble (& not fat soluble).

53.What type of molecule is cAMP, or what role does it play?
A) a second messenger
B) an amino acid based hormone
C) a catecholamine
D) a steroid hormone
ANS: A
Explaination: Cyclic AMP is a second messenger. That is, it is released from the inside of the plasma membrane when an AA-based hormone binds to its receptor.

54.Which one is NOT a mode of action of hormones on their target cell?
A) a hormone may stimulate the synthesis of an enzyme in the target cell.
B) a hormone may activate an enzyme by altering its shape.
C) a hormone may deactivate an enzyme by altering its structure.
D) some hormones are enzymes that promote a chemical reaction in a cell. 
ANS: D
Explaination: Hormones are not enzymes (but may cause enzymes to be formed).

55.What may be correctly said about oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone?
A) they are made and released from the posterior pituitary
B) they are made in the hypothalamus and stored and released from the posterior pituitary
C) they are made in the hypothalamus and stored and released from the anterior pituitary
D) they are made and released from the anterior pituitary
ANS: B
Explaination: The hypothalamus produces ADH & OT. The posterior pituitary releases them.

56.Which hormones are produced by the adrenal medulla?
A) glucocorticoids
B) mineralocorticoids
C) adrenalin and noradrenalin
D) gonadocorticoids
ANS: C
Explaination: Adrenalin and noradrenalin (also known as epinephrine and nor epinephrine). The other three choices all have “cortico” in their name indicating their adrenal cortex origin.

57.Which cells produce insulin?
A) the acini cells of the pancreas
B) parafollicular cells of the thymus
C) alpha cells of the islets of Langerhans
D) beta cells of the islets of Langerhans
ANS: D
Explaination: Islets of Langerhans = pancreatic islets. Alpha cells produce glucagon.

58.What are the two parts of the pituitary gland known as?
A) the thalamus and the hypothalamus
B) anterior and posterior
C) alpha and beta cells
D) cortex and medulla
ANS: B
Explaination: Anterior pituitary (epithelial tissue) and posterior pituitary (neural tissue)

59.Which of the following could be a definition of a hormone?
A) chemicals released to communicate between adjacent cells in contact.
B) a chemical messenger released into blood to coordinate activities in distant tissues.
C) a chemical messenger released by a neurone at a synapse.
D) a chemical messenger in the extracellular fluid between cells of a single tissue.
ANS: B
Explaination: Hormones are also known as circulating hormones, meaning they are transported in the blood.

60.One of the following groups of hormones has their receptor inside the cell. Which one?
A) steroid hormones
B) catecholamines
C) adrenalin and noradrenalin
D) peptide hormones
ANS: A
Explaination: steroids are lipids, hence are lipid soluble so can enter the cell.

61.Which two hormones are stored in the posterior pituitary prior to their release?
A) luteinising hormone and follicle stimulating hormone
B) adrenalin and noradrenalin
C) calcitonin and calcitriol
D) oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone
ANS: D
Explaination: OT & ADH are produced in the hypothalamus before being transported to the posterior pituitary.

62.What is a function of calcitonin?
A) accelerating Ca2+ release from bone
B) stimulating Ca2+ excretion by the kidneys
C) reducing Ca2+ deposition in bone
D) stimulating the formation of calcitriol in the kidneys
ANS: B
Explaination: Calcitonin decreases the blood calcium concentration. B is the only choice compatible with this.

63.The hormones thyroxine and tri-iodothyronine contain which element?
A) cobalt
B) iron
C) iodine
D) manganese
ANS: C
Explaination: These thyroid hormones require iodine in their molecule.

64.What is produced in the adrenal cortex?
A) cholesterol
B) catecholamines
C) adrenalin and noradrenalin
D) corticosteroids
ANS: D
Explaination: “Cortico”steroids are made in the adrenal cortex. Choice B and C are the same – these hormones are made in the adrenal medulla.

65.What is the function of insulin?
A) enhance the transport of glucose through the plasma membrane into the cell
B) promote glycogenolysis
C) promote gluconeogenesis
D) to raise blood sugar level
ANS: A
Explaination: Insulin lowers the level of glucose in the blood. The other three choices are about increasing the blood glucose level.

66.Which of the following statements about endocrine hormones is always true?
A) They are secreted by neurones
B) They are derived from amino acids
C) They are produced by exocrine glands
D) They are released into the bloodstream
ANS: D
Explaination: Endocrine hormones are also known as circulating (in blood) hormones.

67.Which of the following statements about corticosteroids is true?
A) They may also act as neurotransmitters
B) They are transported dissolved in blood
C) They are produced by the adrenal gland
D) They are amino acid derivatives
ANS: C
Explaination: They are produced by the adrenal cortex.

68.Which structure produces epinephrine and norepinephrine?
A) adrenal pelvis
B) the anterior pituitary
C) adrenal medulla
D) adrenal cortex
ANS: C
Explaination: The medulla (interior) of the adrenal gland.

69.Which cells produce insulin?
A) the acini
B) the alpha cells
C) the beta cells
D) the islets of Langerhans
ANS: C
Explaination: The beta cells of the islets of Langerhans.

70.What is the function of erythropoietin (EPO)?
A) stimulate bone marrow to produce red blood cells
B) decrease the plasma concentration of Ca++
C) increase the plasma concentration of Ca++
D) to raise blood sugar level
ANS: A
Explaination: EPO is produced in the kidneys and stimulates active (red) marrow to produce blood cells.

71.Finish the sentence so that it is correct: A hormone may be defined as a chemical messenger that:
A) is released into circulation in small quantities.
B) facilitates communication between adjacent cells.
C) moves through extracellular fluid between cells of a single tissue
D) crosses the synaptic cleft and binds to a receptor.
ANS: A
Explaination: Hormones travel through the blood to all parts of the body and only small quantities are required.

72.Endocrine communication involves hormones of two types
A) first messengers and second messengers
B) steroid hormones and amino acid based hormones
C) amino acid derivatives and peptide hormones
D) peptide hormones and corticosteroids
ANS: B
Explaination: Hormones are of two structural types and this determines whether they are lipid soluble (can pass through the plasma membrane) or not.

73.Which of the following statements is FALSE?
A) peptide hormones are not able to penetrate the cell membrane
B) thyroid hormone can cross the membrane
C) steroid hormones bind to receptors on the outside of the cell membrane
D) catecholamines are not lipid soluble
ANS: C
Explaination: Steroid hormones are lipid soluble so their receptors are inside the cell as they can pass through the plasma membrane.

74.The posterior pituitary does which one of the following?
A) produces growth hormone, prolactin and tropic hormones
B) secretes regulatory hormones that control endocrine cells in the anterior pituitary
C) exerts neural control over other endocrine glands
D) stores and releases oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone
ANS: D
Explaination: OT & ADH are made in hypothalamus and passed along neurones to the posterior pituitary.

75.What does insulin do?
A) it lowers blood sugar level
B) it causes the breakdown of glycogen to glucose
C) it increases metabolic rate
D) it hydrolyses glucose into ATP
ANS: A
Explaination: Insulin stimulates the uptake of glucose into cells from the blood.

76.An amino acid based hormone binds to its receptor. This has the effect of: A. activating an enzyme to produce cAMP
A) activating an enzyme to produce cAMP
B) causing it to diffuse through the cell to trigger a cascade of reactions
C) activate a G-protein
D) allowing it to move along the membrane
ANS: C
Explaination: After a hormone binds to its receptor, a G (for guanine) protein is activated as the first effect. The G-protein then moves along the membrane to activate an enzyme that produces – for example – cAMP, which is a “second messenger”.

77.The structure that secretes regulatory hormones that control the pituitary gland is known as the:
A) hypothalamus
B) hypophysis
C) hypothyroid
D) hypothymus
ANS: A
Explaination: Hypothalamus is structure. Hypophysis is another name for the pituitary gland.

78.Why are the receptors for amino acid-based hormones on the outside surface of the cell membrane?
A) cells can respond faster when the hormone does not need to enter the cell.
B) amino acid-based hormones cannot penetrate cell membranes.
C) lysosomes in the intracellular fluid digest amino acid-based hormones.
D) amino acid-based hormones have no role in activating genes in the nucleus.
ANS: B
Explaination: Amino acid-based hormones are not lipid soluble.

79.What is the difference between endocrine glands and exocrine glands?
A) endocrine glands produce hormones whereas exocrine glands do not.
B) exocrine glands secrete into the blood stream whereas endocrine glands do not.
C) endocrine glands are controlled by the autonomic nervous system whereas exocrine glands are not.
D) exocrine glands secrete steroid hormones whereas endocrine glands secrete amino acid-based hormones.
ANS: A
Explaination: By definition endocrine glands are part of the endocrine system and they produce hormones.

80.The pituitary gland has an anterior portion and a posterior portion. One difference between the two is:
A) the anterior portion releases hormones following a nervous stimulus while the posterior portion releases hormones following a hormonal stimulus.
B) the posterior portion is able to produce hormones while the anterior portion merely stores hormones made elsewhere.
C) the anterior portion releases antidiuretic hormone (ADH) while the posterior portion does not.
D) the posterior portion is neural tissue while the anterior portion is glandular tissue.
ANS: D
Explaination: Choices A, B & C are the reverse of the true situation.

81.By what other name is adrenaline also known?
A) noradrenaline
B) epinephrine
C) androgen
D) ANP
ANS: B
Explaination: Perhaps to diminish the perception that the adrenal gland only produces adrenaline.

82.Which hormones does the pancreas produce?
A) epinephrine and norepinephrine.
B) oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone.
C) glucagon and insulin.
D) glucocorticoids and aldosterone
ANS: C
Explaination: The pancreatic islets produce these hormones which manage the concentration of glucose in the blood.

83.Which statement is NOT CORRECT about hormones: A. They are chemical substances that alter cell activity
A) They are chemical substances that alter cell activity
B) They regulate metabolic function of other cells in the body
C) Steroid hormones are amino acid-based and are synthesized from cholesterol
D) They are produced in glands and transported via the blood stream
ANS: C
Explaination: Steroid hormones are not based on amino acids. They are lipids.

84.What does the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland synthesise and release?
A) Growth hormone-releasing hormone
B) Corticotropin-releasing hormone
C) Thyroid-stimulating hormone
D) Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
ANS: C
Explaination: All the releasing hormones are produced in the hypothalamus.

85.How do calcitonin or parathyroid hormone control blood calcium levels?
A) Calcitonin acts to increase blood calcium levels
B) Parathyroid hormone release is inhibited by increased calcium levels
C) Parathyroid hormone stimulates bone resorbing cells to take up calcium
D) Calcitonin inhibits parathyroid hormone
ANS: B
Explaination: PTH acts to increase blood calcium levels. Hence less is required when blood calcium level is high.

86.What controls the blood glucose level?
A) The action of insulin
B) The action of glucagon
C) The action of insulin and glucagon
D) The action of insulin, glucagon and glycogen
ANS: C
Explaination: Insulin increases blood glucose, while glucagon decreases blood glucose. Glycogen is not a hormone, so it does not affect the level of glucose in the blood.

87.Complete the following sentence correctly: The hypothalamus:
A) Is the major link between the nervous and the endocrine systems.
B) Is situated in the brain superior to the thalamus.
C) Produces a hormone that stimulates the thyroid gland.
D) Does not produce anti-diuretic hormone (ADH).
ANS: A
Explaination: The hypothalamus integrates the nervous and endocrine systems of body control.

88.Which of the following secretes growth hormone?
A) the adrenal glands
B) The thyroid gland
C) The posterior lobe of the pituitary gland
D) The anterior lobe of the pituitary gland
ANS: D
Explaination: The anterior lobe produces and releases GH.

89.Blood calcium levels are controlled by hormones from which structures?
A) The parathyroid glands and the thyroid gland
B) The anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and the thyroid gland
C) The parathyroid glands and the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland
D) The adrenal cortex and the hypothalamus.
ANS: A
Explaination: Parathyroid glands secrete parathyroid hormone (to increase blood Ca level) while the parafollicular cells of the thyroid produce calcitonin which aids in lowering blood Ca.

90.Which statement is NOT CORRECT?
A) Males and females produce testosterone and oestrogen respectively in their gonads.
B) Both male and females produce follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone.
C) Oxytocin is produced and released from the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland.
D) Production of testosterone and oestrogen inhibits the release of gonadotrophin releasing hormone from the hypothalamus.
ANS: C
Explaination: Oxytocin is produced in the hypothalamus and released from the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland.

91.The hormones known as “catecholamines” (adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine) are not lipid soluble. Therefore their receptor sites are:
A) On the inside of the plasma membrane.
B) On the outside of the plasma membrane.
C) In the cell cytoplasm.
D) In the cell nucleus.
ANS: B
Explaination: With the receptors on the outside of the membrane, catecholamines do not need to be able to penetrate the membrane.